MEM: Multi-Scale Embodied Memory for
Vision Language Action Models

Marcel Torne∗ 1 2 † Karl Pertsch∗ 1 Homer Walke3 † Kyle Vedder1

Suraj Nair1

Brian Ichter1

Allen Z. Ren1 Haohuan Wang1
Quan Vuong1

Jiaming Tang1 4 † Kyle Stachowicz1 3 † Karan Dhabalia1 Michael Equi1

Jost Tobias Springenberg1

Sergey Levine1

Chelsea Finn1 Danny Driess1

https://pi.website/research/memory

Fig. 1: Multi-Scale Embodied Memory (MEM) equips Vision Language Action Models (VLAs) with memory for solving long-horizon tasks
at scale. It has two key components: an efficient video encoder for short-horizon image-based memory, and a language-based memory
mechanism for capturing long-horizon memory. After training on a diverse corpus of robot and non-robot data, MEM VLAs can solve tasks
that require up to fifteen minutes of memory, handle partial observability, and perform in-context adaptation of manipulation strategies.

Abstract—Conventionally, memory in end-to-end robotic learn-
ing involves inputting a sequence of past observations into the
learned policy. However, in complex multi-stage real-world tasks,
the robot’s memory must represent past events at multiple levels
of granularity: from long-term memory that captures abstracted
semantic concepts (e.g., a robot cooking dinner should remember
which stages of the recipe are already done) to short-term memory
that captures recent events and compensates for occlusions (e.g.,
a robot remembering the object it wants to pick up once its
arm occludes it). In this work, our main insight is that an
effective memory architecture for long-horizon robotic control
should combine multiple modalities to capture these different
levels of abstraction. We introduce Multi-Scale Embodied Memory
(MEM), an approach for mixed-modal long-horizon memory in
robot policies. MEM combines video-based short-horizon memory,
compressed via a video encoder, with text-based long-horizon
memory. Together, they enable robot policies to perform tasks
that span up to fifteen minutes, like cleaning up a kitchen, or
preparing a grilled cheese sandwich. Additionally, we find that
memory enables MEM policies to intelligently adapt manipulation
strategies in-context.

∗equal contribution, †work conducted during an internship at PI.
1Physical Intelligence, 2Stanford University, 3UC Berkeley, 4MIT

I. INTRODUCTION

Efficiently and effectively endowing robotic policies with
memory requires multiple levels of abstraction. While in
principle we could simply encode the entire sequence of
past observations into the context of the policy, this becomes
intractable for long tasks, necessitating either very short
sequences or significant subsampling. However, in practical
settings, the representation required for long- and short-term
memory is likely to be very different. For example,
the
robot might need to remember a recent observation to handle
occlusions, and it might need to remember that it has already
added one of the ingredients when cooking a meal. But these
memories are fundamentally different: the former might require
storing a few images over a short time period, the latter might
require long-term memory but only a few bits of information.
An effective memory architecture for robot policies should
use multiple modalities to represent memories at these different
levels of abstraction. For short-horizon memory, dense image-
based memory is well-suited to resolve occlusions and allows

SubtaskMemorySummarySolve Tasks w/ Partial ObservabilityPerform In-Context AdaptationLong-Horizon Tasks with MemoryMore Memory SkillsRobotActionMulti-Scale Embodied MemoryVLMVLAAction ExpertI wiped the counterwith the sponge anddried it with the...PromptClean up thekitchen. Wipethe countertopwith the sponge and dry it withthe paper toweland throw the towels in the trash under the...Short-Term Video MemoryLong-Term Text Memoryrecipe set upmake grilled cheeseclean kitchenfollow recipe orderopen fridge door from other sideadapt pick chopstickto table heightwait correct time tocook grilled cheeseclean the dishes1.pot2.potatoes3.milk4.butter5....count scoopsfind objectwindowcleaningunpack withocclusionson

we

these

Based

observations,

the robot to quickly adapt its manipulation strategy, e.g., by
changing the grasp after failing to pick up an object. For long-
horizon memory, we often only need to keep track of events
at a semantic level, such as which ingredient has already been
added to a dish. In this case, a language-based representation
provides much better compression than raw observations, and
allows us to store high-level memories over long time periods.
introduce
Multi-Scale Embodied Memory (MEM), a system for equipping
long-horizon memory. MEM
policies with multi-modal,
combines two key ingredients to make long-horizon memory
tractable. First, we use a video encoder architecture to
effectively encode multiple seconds of dense image-based
memory into a compact representation. Second, we introduce
a language-based memory mechanism in which the policy
keeps track of semantic events in a compressed language
format. This memory system can not only accommodate
very long horizon tasks, but also enables a variety of new
capabilities by leveraging the short-term memory, such as
in-context adaptation to correct mistakes, and resilience to
partial observability and self-occlusion.

To evaluate MEM, we integrate it into the π0.6 model [35], a
generalist VLA trained on a diverse mixture of robot, vision-
language, and video data. We show that the resulting policy
achieves state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of
complex manipulation tasks. We also show that MEM enables
our policy to solve long-horizon tasks like cleaning up a whole
kitchen or preparing a grilled cheese sandwich, which require
keeping track of memories for up to fifteen minutes.

In summary, we introduce a system for multi-scale, long-
horizon memory for robot policies. By effectively representing
short- and long-horizon memory via video and language
representations respectively, MEM allows robot policies to keep
track of memories across tens of minutes, without sacrificing
runtime constraints. To implement MEM, we use an efficient
video encoder architecture and a language-based memory
system, and demonstrate their effectiveness through state-of-
the-art performance across diverse robot tasks. With MEM, we
enable robot policies to perform complex tasks like cleaning
up whole kitchens, which can span up to fifteen minutes.

II. RELATED WORK

Vision language action models with memory. Recent works
have demonstrated that learned robot control policies, trained
on large amounts of diverse robot experience, can lead to
generalizable manipulation, e.g., in unseen environments [19,
18, 43, 46, 31, 52]. Vision language action models (VLAs) [15,
8, 33, 32, 13, 22, 5, 49, 54, 2, 41, 34, 44, 50, 4, 51, 45]
are a popular approach for training such generalist policies,
in which a pre-trained vision-language model is finetuned
with robot experience. While many of today’s state-of-the-art
VLAs are trained without memory and act purely based on the
current observation of the environment [22, 18, 19, 43, 46, 31],
a growing number of works have explored adding memory
to policy training since it is a core requirement for solv-
ing a wide range of real-world tasks. While early works

explore architectures with recurrent memory modules [37, 28],
more recent works that use transformer-based architectures
simply pass a dense history of prior observations into the
policy [38, 23, 32]; computational and latency constraints make
it challenging to scale such approaches to support very long-
horizon memory. Some works have explored latent memory
architectures [24, 39, 17, 12], but only evaluated on short-
horizon memory tasks. Others have proposed various heuristics
to compress memory information, e.g., by relying on purely
proprioceptive memory [53], 2D point tracks [55, 9], by only
retaining keyframes from prior timesteps [40, 48, 29], or by
representing memory in natural language [26]. A challenge
for all these approaches is that it is hard to find a one-
modality-fits-all solution for robot memory, and each individual
representation will result in a compromise on capabilities:
proprioception, point traces, or natural language alone, for
example, lose precise spatial information about grasp angle and
height that is necessary to correct a slipped grasp. Keyframes,
on the other hand, need to aggressively sparsify the observation
history to make inference computationally feasible in long-
horizon tasks, but may lose the ability to estimate environment
and robot dynamics, which often requires more densely sampled
observations. In contrast to these prior works, we introduce
a multi-modal memory system that combines short-horizon,
dense vision-based memory with long-horizon, language-based
memory. This allows us to resolve partial observability, perform
in-context adaptation, and solve long-horizon tasks, all without
sacrificing efficiency. Finally, an orthogonal line of work
proposes approaches for mitigating causal confusion [11, 55]
in which a policy with memory erroneously learns to copy
over prior actions, e.g., by introducing auxiliary objectives [47].
While similar approaches could be combined with our memory
system, our experiments suggest that we can achieve high
policy performance without such objectives, which may be
attributed to our large-scale and diverse training data.
Long-Context Models. Outside of robotics, a large body of
work has explored the training of long-context language and
vision-language models [27, 42, 30]. In particular, in the context
of video processing, there is a rich literature on designing
efficient encoders for long video inputs [1, 3, 25]. Our work
leverages similar ideas to [3, 1] for using sparse attention
operations to efficiently process video inputs. Yet, in the context
of robotics, latency constraints imposed by the real world
require additional efficiency considerations: processing more
than ten minutes of high-frequency, multi-frame video within
a latency budget of a few hundred milliseconds is challenging,
even on modern hardware. Thus, our work combines a short-
horizon, video-based memory architecture with a significantly
more compressed, language-based memory architecture for
effective long-horizon context.

III. MULTI-SCALE EMBODIED MEMORY FOR VLAS

In this section, we describe our proposed system for
equipping VLAs with memory on multiple time scales. For
robot policies deciding on the next action to take, relevant
context often spans multiple time scales. The most recent

timesteps help understand the dynamics of the robot and
scene, resolve self-occlusions, and quickly adapt fine-grained
manipulation strategies like re-grasps. On the other hand, long-
horizon memory is required to understand, for example, which
steps of a recipe have already been completed, or which subtask
has repeatedly failed. In theory, both types of context could be
provided by conditioning the policy on a dense sequence of
all its previous observations. However, this becomes quickly
infeasible for tasks spanning tens of minutes. Our goal in
designing Multi-Scale Embodied Memory (MEM) is to enable
both efficient short and long-term memory. For short-horizon
memory, we use an efficient video encoder architecture that
allows us to pass a multi-second horizon of observations to
the policy, enabling rapid in-context adaptation and robustness
to self-occlusions. For long-horizon memory, we design a
language-based memory representation, and train the model
to keep track of past events at a semantic level, in natural
language. This way, we can equip our policies with memory
spanning up to 15 minutes, without sacrificing runtime latency
constraints.

We first give an overview of the MEM memory system
(Section III-A), then provide a detailed description of both
the language-based memory (Section III-B) and video encoder
architecture (Section III-C), and finally detail the instantiation
of our memory system in the π0.6-MEM VLA (Section III-D).

A. Multi-Scale Embodied Memory (MEM)

Figure 2 shows an overview of our MEM system. Our goal
is to train a policy π(at:t+H |ot−T :t, g) that predicts a chunk
of continuous robot actions at:t+H conditioned on the task
goal g in natural language, as well as a sequence of dense
observations (e.g. images, proprioceptive state) provided as
input. In comparison, most previous VLAs only condition on
a single observation ot, while we want the policy to process
many (T ) observations.

As mentioned above, scaling the number of past observations
such that they span multiple minutes, and can thus serve as
a form of long-range memory is infeasible. Therefore, we
factorize the problem of action prediction as follows:

π(at:t+H , lt+1, mt+1|ot−T :t, mt, g)

≈ πLL(at:t+H |ot−K:t, lt+1, g)
πHL(lt+1, mt+1|ot, mt, g),

where we separated the probability of actions into a low-level
policy πLL and high-level policy πHL. The low-level policy
models sequences of actions conditioned on the task goal g,
a shorter sequence of observations (K ≪ T ) and a subtask
instruction lt+1. The subtask instruction, in turn, is generated
by the high-level policy, which is not only conditioned on the
task goal, but also a summarization mt of previous semantic
events in natural language. We call this summarization the
language memory in the following. It allows us to significantly
reduce the number K ≪ T of dense observations that are
input to the model, without sacrificing the ability to capture
memory on the order of many minutes. While previous work

has employed a similar split into high- and low-level policies
with subtask instructions as the interface, the key novelty here
is that πHL additionally predicts the updated language memory
mt+1 based on its own previous prediction mt.

B. Language Memory for Long-Term Memory

The language memory mt

is a summary of previous
semantic events that happened while the policy is solving
a task. The main idea is to train the high-level policy
πHL(lt+1, mt+1|ot−K:t, mt, g) such that it predicts the relevant
summary mt+1 from its previous summary mt and current
observations and task. This way, the model explicitly decides
when and how to update its memory representation. For
example, for a kitchen cleaning robot that already placed a
plate in the cabinet and just finished picking up the next bowl,
a memory update may look like the following:

mt: I placed a plate in the cabinet and moved
to the counter.
(cid:119)
(cid:119)
(cid:127)
mt+1: I placed a plate in the cabinet, moved to
the counter, and picked up a bowl.

Importantly, we

In order to train πHL, we need to obtain appropriate training
data, including summarization actions we want the high-level
policy to take. For this, we develop a pipeline to generate
training data for the transition between mt and mt+1 as follows.
Given a robot episode with subtask language annotations l0:T ,
we pass the subtask instructions together with an indicator
whether the subtask execution failed or succeeded to an off-
the-shelf pre-trained language model (LLM) and ask it to
summarize all information from the previous subtasks that
is still relevant for future task execution. We collect the
corresponding output and use it to label the sequence for
training the high-level policy.
instruct

the LLM to remove or
compress
information in the language memory when-
ever appropriate. For example,
remembering
the precise attributes of all objects that were manipu-
lated (“I put a light green bowl, a dark blue
bowl and a bright yellow bowl into the top
right cabinet”), it is often sufficient to just remember
where the bowls were placed (“I placed three bowls
in the top right cabinet”). Compressing the lan-
guage memory helps keep it succinct (and thus inference
fast) and reduces the potential for train-inference distribution
shift, since fewer bits of information are carried over between
timesteps. We find that current generation LLMs are effective
at this task when prompted to keep only the minimal set of
relevant information.

instead of

C. Video Encoder for Dense Short-Term Visual Memory

The language memory mechanism, as described in the
last section, can capture long-term semantic concepts. In
order to enable our policies to reason about fine-grained
details, dynamics, and resolve self-occlusion, access to a dense
sequence of previous observations ot−K:t is required as input to

Fig. 2: The MEM memory system equips VLAs like π0.6 with long-horizon memory via two key components: (1) a high-level policy is
trained to keep track of long-horizon semantic events by updating a language memory mt (left, Section III-B), (2) the low-level policy uses
a short-horizon observation-based memory that is efficiently encoded via a video encoder (right, Section III-C).

Fig. 3: Naively passing a sequence of observations into the backbone
of a VLA rapidly increases inference latency. Our efficient video
encoder architecture allows us to use many observation frames while
remaining under critical real-time inference thresholds [6, 7]. Timings
measured for the π0.6 VLA, with four input camera streams on one
NVIDIA H100 GPU.

the policy. In most VLAs, encoding the observations, especially
for images, accounts for the largest fraction of compute
spent during training and significantly impacts inference speed.
Therefore, as we show in Figure 3, simply encoding a sequence
of observations one-by-one and passing them into the VLA
backbone quickly becomes infeasible as the context grows
beyond a few timesteps. The VLA will rapidly incur inference
latencies beyond what prior work has deemed acceptable to
prevent significant degradation in on-robot performance for
dexterous manipulation tasks [6, 7].

To address this, we propose to use a video encoder that
can compress frames in the time dimension before passing the
encoding into the VLM backbone. Our video encoder extends
Vision Transformers (ViTs) [14], typically used as the vision
encoder in most VLAs, to encode video inputs. Importantly,
our encoder leaves the single-image performance of the VLM
we start with invariant, and thus can be used to endow any
pre-trained VLM with highly effective (yet computationally
cheap) visual memory capabilities.

ViTs process images in patches and repeatedly perform

Fig. 4: We propose to use an efficient video encoder architecture for
compressing short-horizon, image-based memory. Our architecture
expands standard ViTs for encoding video inputs by interleaving layers
that apply bidirectional spatial attention within each observation (white
arrows) with layers that additionally apply causal-temporal attention
operations across observations (black arrows). We drop observation
tokens for past timesteps in upper layers of the ViT to compress the
inputs and reduce the number of tokens passed to the VLA backbone.

bidirectional attention across the patch embeddings (across
multiple layers) to derive a final set of output embeddings. We
keep the same general structure and our video encoder first
patchifies all images in the input video separately. Inspired
by existing work on space-time separable attention for video
understanding (see e.g. Bertasius et al. [3] for an overview)
we then modify the attention mechanism every 4-th layer of
the ViT to incorporate both spatial (as is standard in ViTs)
but also temporal context. To avoid prohibitively expensive
joint attention operations over the very large number of total
patches in time and space, our architecture factorizes attention
into separate spatial and temporal attention operations. Every
4-th layer additively adds attention over the time dimension by
performing attention over the timesteps’ representations for the
same image patch using a causal attention mask (“temporal”)
– see Figure 4 for a visual depiction and Appendix C for

video memory encodetimlanguage subtasπ0.6-mem high-level
pre-trained VLM: SigLIP (400M) + Gemma (4B“I prepared the pot and got ... I opened the drawer with the masher.“Pick up the mashermt+1: updated language memormt: language memor“Prepare the recipe.“I prepared the pot 
and got the potatoes, milk, and butter. I moved to the drawerlanguage subtasπ0.6-mem low-level
pre-trained VLM: SigLIP (400M) + Gemma (4B“Pick up the mashercontinuous actionnoisaction expert
(860M-1.1.23.11.4124681216Total Frames0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Inference Time (s)Without video encoderWith video encoder (Ours)Real-time barrier (300 ms)a mathematical description. This reduces the computational
complexity of the corresponding attention in each layer from
O(n2K 2) (for naive attention over both time and space) to
O(Kn2 + nK 2). Finally, to reduce the number of patches
processed by the subsequent VLA transformer backbone, we
only pass the representation computed for the current timestep
onwards (dropping representations for all patches from past
timesteps). Thus, our video encoder matches the number of
tokens typically passed into the VLA backbone in single-
timestep VLAs without memory; and we effectively force
the video-encoder to incorporate temporal information into the
representation produced for the current observation (via the
modified attention mechanism).

A key property of our video encoder is that it does not
introduce new learnable parameters compared to standard,
single-image ViTs. Video encoding capabilities are added by
modifying the attention pattern of the ViT and adding a fixed
sinusoidal temporal position encoding. Thus, we can initialize
the weights of our video encoder from the pre-trained ViT
weights of any standard vision-language-models, just like in no-
memory VLAs. To maximize feature transfer, we ensure that
for K = 1, i.e., single-image input, our encoder’s initialization
exactly matches that of the VLM, which we achieve with a
sinusoidal temporal position embedding that has value 0 for
t = 0.

In summary, our video encoder architecture allows us to
effectively scale observation-based memory to tens of seconds
without incurring prohibitive computational overhead during
training or inference (Figure 3), while at
the same time
permitting initialization from pre-trained vision-language model
weights.

D. Integrating MEM into the π0.6 VLA

For our experimental evaluation, we equip the π0.6 VLA [36]
with MEM memory by adapting its architecture to support the
video encoder from Section III-C. Like π0.6, the π0.6 VLA with
MEM is initialized from a pre-trained Gemma3-4B VLM [21].
Following Driess et al. [16], the model is trained with both
discrete FAST action token prediction [34] and a flow-matching
action expert [18] with 860M parameters. Gradients don’t flow
from the action expert into the VLM backbone [16]. The model
is trained with an input resolution of 448x448 px per camera
stream and up to four camera streams (depending on the robot
embodiment).

In addition to past camera frames, the observation memory
of the π0.6 model with MEM memory also contains past propri-
oceptive states, e.g., joint angles. The π0.6 VLA represents the
robot’s state in text form. However, in the case of a sequence
of past states, this would quickly lead to a very large number of
state text tokens. To prevent this, we instead use a continuous
state embedding by projecting each proprioceptive state into
the backbone embedding space with a linear projection. This
way, we only produce K proprioceptive state tokens for an
observation memory of length K.

We pre-train π0.6-MEM on a diverse mixture of data that
includes teleoperated robot demonstrations, policy rollout data,

and human corrections similarly to Physical Intelligence et al.
[36], vision-language tasks, and video-language tasks, such
as video captioning. During pre-training, we train the model
with a sequence of six observations (five past and the current
observation), spaced with a stride of one second. During post-
training, we find that we can flexibly expand this horizon and
accommodate much longer observation-based memory (up to
18 frames and 54 seconds of observation-based memory in our
experiments), similarly to what has been observed in language
model and vision-language model training [10]. We run all
on-robot experiments using either inference-time real-time
chunking (RTC, [6]) or training-time RTC [7] for asynchronous
real-time inference.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

Our experimental evaluation aims to answer the following
questions: (1) Does MEM enable VLAs to perform tasks that
require long-term memory spanning up to 15 minutes? (2) Does
MEM unlock new capabilities in VLA models, like in-context
adaptation of manipulation strategies, based on short-term
memory of recent failures? (3) How does the performance
of MEM compare to prior approaches for adding memory to
VLA models?

A. MEM Solves Tasks Requiring Long-Horizon Memory

We evaluate our method’s potential for enabling long-horizon
tasks using two challenging scenarios that require retaining
memory for up to fifteen minutes (see Figure 5, rows 1 &
2): (1) Recipe setup: The robot is given a detailed prompt
specifying the ingredients and cookware required to cook a
recipe and their location, and is asked to fetch all of them from
various cabinets, drawers, or, e.g., the fridge, and place them
at a specific location, e.g., on the stove or a specific countertop.
Memory is required to keep track of all items that have already
been assembled and remember to close drawers, cabinets, or
the fridge once the task is complete. We train on 42 recipes
across diverse kitchen scenes, and evaluate on five of the
recipes in unseen kitchens and with unseen objects. (2) Clean
up kitchen: The robot needs to clean up a messy kitchen
environment, including stowing objects in the fridge, wiping
countertops, washing dishes with soap and running water, and
placing dishes in the drying rack. Memory is required for
remembering steps in the cleanup process (e.g., whether soap
has been added to the dishes before washing, whether both
front and back of the dish have been washed), remembering
which surfaces have already been cleaned, and remembering to
close cabinets after objects have been stowed. This task is not
only challenging from a memory perspective, but also requires
policies to perform multiple dexterous manipulations, from
wiping surfaces to carefully handling water and soap. For more
details on training data, evaluation conditions, and scoring
rubrics for progress scores, see Section B. All evaluations use
10 rollouts per policy and task or recipe, and we report mean
± standard error in all graphs.

Figure 6 shows the results: without memory, even state-of-
the-art models like π0.6 struggle to perform these challenging

Fig. 5: We test MEM policies across multiple challenging, long-horizon dexterous manipulation tasks that require retaining memory for up to
fifteen minutes, including setting up a recipe, cleaning up a kitchen (Section IV-A), and making a grilled cheese sandwich (Section IV-C).

manipulation tasks via in-context adaptation (see Section IV-B).
Long-horizon language memory, on the other hand, is essential
for remembering semantic events in the more distant past.
It allows the policy to keep track of steps in the recipe, or
remember to close doors that it has opened. We also evaluate
a version of our policy that removes the compression applied
to the language-based memory (see Section III-B): instead of
training the model to compress and discard information that is
no longer needed, we simply concatenate all previous subtask
instructions up to a maximum length in the input of the high-
level policy. We find that this type of “naive” language memory
works significantly worse than our model-predicted summaries.
The core challenge with “naive” language memory is a large
train-inference distribution shift: during training, most episodes
utter any given subtask instruction only once (e.g., “pick
up bowl” → “place bowl in cabinet”) since they
are typically near-optimal human demonstrations. Yet, during
inference time policies may repeatedly fail on a given subtask,
causing the high-level policy to repeatedly produce the same
subtask before finally succeeding and moving on (“pick
up bowl” → “pick up bowl” → “pick up bowl” →
“place bowl in cabinet”),
leading to a distribution
shift that can degrade overall policy performance. In contrast,
MEM’s language memory mechanism would simply not update
the memory representation until the bowl was successfully
picked up. This compression of context (e.g., discarding failed
attempts) thus reduces distribution shift and improves overall
performance.

B. In-Context Adaptation of Manipulation Strategies

In the previous section, we showed that MEM can enable
VLAs to solve very long-horizon tasks. In this section, we
investigate whether equipping VLAs with memory can unlock
improved performance, even on shorter-horizon tasks that at
first glance may not require memory. Intuitively, while memory

Fig. 6: Performance of policies on challenging, long-horizon manipu-
lation tasks. Without memory, even state-of-the-art generalist policies
like π0.6 struggle to perform such tasks. We ablate the memory
components and show these tasks are solvable by combining short-
horizon, observation-based memory, with long-horizon, language-
based memory. Naive memory of past language instructions, without
compression, struggles with training-inference distribution shifts.

long-horizon tasks. While prior works have shown policies
that perform manipulation over extended periods of time [36],
solving real-world tasks with flexible subtask sequences and
frequent partial observability fundamentally requires memory.
The results show that MEM is effective at providing the required
context to the policy across both short and long-horizon time
intervals, and increases policy success rate significantly.

To better understand what contributes to π0.6-MEM’s strong
performance, we perform a detailed ablation study of the
different components of our approach. We report the results in
Figure 6. We compare to versions of our policy that remove
short-horizon video memory or long-horizon language memory,
and show that both are essential to solving the challenge tasks.
Without video memory, the robot may struggle to understand
how long it has been washing a plate or wiping a surface, and
get “stuck” indefinitely. Video memory also helps robustify

Set Up RecipeMove Pot to SinkGrab PotatoesGrab MilkGrab ButterGrab MasherPlace on CounterClean KitchenSponge SpillWipe SpillPut Away MustardPut Away PlateWash PlateRack PlateGrilled CheesePick Up BreadPlace BreadCover and WaitFlipCover and WaitPlateRecipe Set Up0%25%50%75%100%Task Progress (%)Clean KitchenAverageπ0.6 (No Memory)Only Video MemoryNaive Text + Video MemoryOnly Text Memoryπ0.6-MEMC. Analysis Experiments

Tasks. To compare our method to existing approaches that
equip VLAs with memory across a wide range of capabilities,
we develop a suite of challenging manipulation tasks that
measure the ability of policies to use memory efficiently, and
perform dexterous manipulations (see Figures 8 and 10 for
task visualizations). The tasks span a diverse set of scenarios
involving single-arm, dual-arm, and mobile robots. They test for
core memory capabilities, like handling partial observability
(e.g., remembering which drawer an object was placed in by
a human; unpacking a grocery bag and remembering whether
objects are left to unpack; placing and removing multiple mugs
under a coffee machine), counting (e.g., counting scoops of
coffee to add to a coffee grinder), timing (e.g., remembering
how long a grilled cheese sandwich has been cooking, see
Figure 5), and spatial memory (e.g., remembering which parts
of a window have already been wiped). They also require
policies to perform precise manipulations (e.g., folding a
stack of laundry or assembling a cardboard box). They are thus
well-suited to test the limits of existing memory approaches
and also compare to the performance of state-of-the-art VLAs
without memory. Following prior work [18], we collect small
post-training datasets for the most challenging manipulation
tasks and for the memory tasks, and evaluate policies out-
of-the-box for all remaining tasks (Figure 10). We provide
detailed descriptions of all task setups in Section B.
Comparisons. A number of prior works

leverage
observation-based (shorter-horizon) memory, and address its
computational challenges through aggressive compression of
observations from past timesteps. We compare our approach to
two representative prior works to understand the tradeoffs of
different memory representations: (1) Pool Memory akin to
Jang et al. [20], we compress all past observations into a single
“memory token” using average pooling. We implement it by
encoding each of the past observations separately with the pre-
trained single-frame ViT, and then applying an average pooling
operation on the frame encodings before passing them into the
VLA backbone. The current timestep’s observation is separately
encoded and passed into the VLA without pooling; (2) Proprio
Memory conditions on a history of low-dimensional robot
states only, akin to [53], to avoid the computational cost of
high-dimensional image memory. All proprioceptive states
from past timesteps are separately passed through a linear
projection, and then fed into the VLA backbone. To ensure
fair comparison, we re-implement all approaches on top of the
π0.6 VLA backbone and use a version of our model without
language-based long-horizon memory. To test the performance
of our policy on the most dexterous tasks, we also compare to
π0.6 without memory, a state-of-the-art VLA that has shown
strong results on complex manipulation tasks [35]. Finally, to
better understand the effect of pre-training on memory efficacy,
we compare to MEM-Posttrain-Only, an ablation of our method
that introduces the video encoder only during post-training on
the target task, starting from the pre-trained π0.6 checkpoint,
akin to Li et al. [24].

Fig. 7: VLAs with memory can perform in-context adaptation of
manipulation strategies, like adjusting grasp height or door opening
direction. Without memory, policies get stuck with a suboptimal
strategy.

across tens of minutes is useful for keeping track of overall task
progress, short-horizon memory can enable policies to adapt
their behavior in-context and intelligently react to mistakes:
instead of failing in the same way over and over, policies can
use context of previous failed attempts to, for example, modify
the way in which they are trying to pick up an object, or how
they open a door.

To test whether MEM unlocks such in-context adaptation, we
set up two tasks on which current state-of-the-art VLAs like
π0.6 struggle (Figure 7): picking up flat objects like chopsticks
with an out-of-distribution table height, which leads to frequent
mis-grasps, and opening fridges where the direction the door
opens is unclear, resulting in repeated failed opening attempts.
To teach policies the in-context adaptation strategy, we
follow [36] and collect targeted human feedback: after the
policy fails, a human intervenes and provides a demonstration
of the corrected manipulation strategy, like adjusting grasp
height for picking up the chopstick. For the fridge-opening
task, we collect exploration rollouts in which the demonstrator
initially does not know the opening mechanism, so the data
naturally contains both the failed attempt and the subsequent
corrective demonstration. We then simply finetune the π0.6-
MEM policy with this correction data, keeping the failed attempt
that preceded the correction in the short-term memory of the
model during training. As a result, the model learns to adapt its
manipulation strategy when it sees a mistake in its short-term
memory. We compare to finetuning the memoryless π0.6 policy
on the same intervention data.

The results in Figure 7 show that the MEM-VLA with memory
is much more effective at leveraging the corrections, and learns
to adapt its manipulation strategy on the fly. The policy without
memory has no way to remember which strategy was attempted
before, and therefore cannot intelligently change the strategy
after a mistake. In contrast, policies with memory can use the
context to understand which strategy has already been tried
and failed, and adjust accordingly.

→0%25%50%75%100%Success Rate+11%→0%25%50%75%100%Success Rate+62%Pick Up ChopstickOpen Fridgew/o memoryw/ memoryFig. 8: Comparison of approaches for equipping VLAs with memory across core memory capabilities (handling partial observability, counting,
visual memory). VLAs without memory struggle to perform these tasks. Only MEM’s memory approach performs well across all core
capabilities.

It can reliably handle partial observability challenges like
remembering the location of objects, and also leverage these
capabilities in dexterous tasks like unpacking a bag of groceries.
Notably, pre-training the observation-based memory on a
diverse data mix of robot and non-robot data significantly
improves the ability of the model to leverage its memory
– even when the memory horizon is significantly expanded
during post-training (e.g., from 5 seconds in pre-training to up
to 1 minute in post-training). The version of our model that only
introduces memory during post-training is noticeably worse at
leveraging the information from past timesteps (see Figure 9).
We emphasize that this model is still initialized from a base
π0.6 checkpoint pre-trained on the same diverse robot data, but
did not develop memory capabilities during this pre-training.
Finally, the head-to-head comparison of Ours (post-train only)
vs. Pool-Memory demonstrates that even without pre-training,
our video encoder design is a more effective approach for
extracting information from prior timesteps than separately
encoding each timestep and average pooling. By interleaving
temporal attention operations throughout the layers of the ViT,
our video encoder can more effectively extract and compress
the relevant information.

In addition to testing core memory capabilities, we also test
the performance of MEM across a range of challenging dexterous
manipulation tasks (Figure 10). We find that the MEM VLA
not only makes effective use of memory in tasks that require
it, but it can also match the state-of-the-art performance of
the π0.6 VLA across challenging dexterous manipulation tasks.
This is notable, since numerous previous works have reported
degradations in performance from adding memory to policies,
e.g., due to causal confusion [11, 55]. We attribute MEM’s
strong performance in large parts to our diverse pre-training
data mixture, which contains episodes of varying optimality,
speed, and control frequency, in addition to diverse internet
videos. Together, this diversity can prevent spurious correlations
in the video encoder that may arise when training on smaller,

Fig. 9: Pre-training MEM on a diverse dataset of robot and non-robot
video data makes it more effective at using its memory to solve
diverse manipulation tasks. Introducing memory during post-training
only results in substantially lower performance.

We report results in Figure 8. We first compare the different
memory approaches on tasks that test core memory capabilities
the π0.6 VLA without memory
(Figure 8). As expected,
struggles on these tasks and often has to resort to random
chance, e.g., when picking which of four drawers to open to
find the object hidden inside (25% success) or whether or not to
add another scoop of coffee (50% success). In contrast, existing
memory solutions improve performance, particularly on simpler
memory tasks that only require a few bits of memory, e.g.,
remembering how many scoops of coffee have already been
added to the hopper. We find that Pool-Memory’s aggressive
observation compression via average-pooling can lead it to
struggle particularly on tasks that require longer-term memory,
like remembering the past positions of multiple coffee mugs
or recalling how many objects are left to unpack in a grocery
bag. Proprio-Memory on the other hand is only effective in
tasks where the robot needs to remember its own state, but
struggles in scenarios where remembering the environment state
is necessary: e.g., recalling which drawer contains a particular
object.

In comparison, the MEM VLA is the only model that achieves
strong performance across all tested memory capabilities.

Swap 3 Mugs0%25%50%75%100%Task Progress (%)Find ObjectUnpack GroceriesScoop CoffeeGrilled CheeseWindow CleaningAverageNo MemoryPool MemoryProprio MemoryOursSwap3 Mugs0%25%50%75%100%Task Progress (%)FindObjectUnpackGroceriesScoopCoffeeGrilledCheeseWindowCleaningAverageOurs (post-train only)OursFig. 10: In addition to effectively using its memory, MEM also matches the performance of state-of-the-art non-memory VLAs across
challenging manipulation tasks that do not require memory.

more uniform robot datasets, and lead to the brittleness and
performance degradation of policies with memory reported in
prior work.

V. CONCLUSION
We presented Multi-Scale Embodied Memory (MEM), an
approach for equipping VLAs with long-horizon memory.
MEM enables VLAs to perform long-horizon tasks that require
tens of minutes of memory, while obeying real-world latency
constraints. MEM also enables in-context adaptation of manip-
ulation strategies and, when combined with the π0.6 VLA,
achieves state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of
manipulation tasks. To achieve this, MEM introduces a mixed-
modal memory architecture that combines short-horizon, video-
based memory, with a long-horizon, language-based memory
mechanism. We believe that MEM is only the first step towards
building robot policies that can effectively manage very long-
horizon memory. Future work can explore how we can scale
memory to last beyond the horizon of a single episode, to span
weeks, months, or years of deployment, and allow us to build
robots that learn continually at deployment time.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Like any robotics effort of this scale, our work involved a
large team of people that helped with data collection, evaluation,
robot operations, and maintenance. We thank the Pi robot
operators and annotators for their help with data collection,
evaluation, and annotation. We thank the operations team for
help with logistics and scheduling. And we thank the hardware
team for keeping all our robots running. We also thank Lili Yu
for helpful discussions about the video encoder architecture.
We thank Claudio Guglieri for help with visualizations for the
blog post, and Donald Jewkes for help with filming and editing
of the video.

REFERENCES

[1] Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Georg Heigold, Chen
Sun, Mario Luˇci´c, and Cordelia Schmid. ViViT: A video

In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
vision transformer.
international conference on computer vision, pages 6836–
6846, 2021.

[2] Suneel Belkhale and Dorsa Sadigh. Minivla: A better vla
with a smaller footprint, 2024. URL https://github.com/
Stanford-ILIAD/openvla-mini.

[3] Gedas Bertasius, Heng Wang, and Lorenzo Torresani. Is
space-time attention all you need for video understanding?
In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
volume 2, page 4, 2021.

[4] Johan Bjorck, Fernando Casta˜neda, Nikita Cherniadev,
Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox,
Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open
foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.14734, 2025.

[5] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail,
Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom,
Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-
action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.

[6] Kevin Black, Manuel Y Galliker, and Sergey Levine. Real-
time execution of action chunking flow policies. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.07339, 2025.

[7] Kevin Black, Allen Z Ren, Michael Equi, and Sergey
Levine. Training-time action conditioning for efficient
real-time chunking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.05964,
2025.

[8] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen
Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski, Tianli Ding,
Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Flo-
rence, Chuyuan Fu, Montse Gonzalez Arenas, Keerthana
Gopalakrishnan, Kehang Han, Karol Hausman, Alex
Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Nikhil
Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang,
Isabel Leal, Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Sergey
Levine, Yao Lu, Henryk Michalewski, Igor Mordatch,
Karl Pertsch, Kanishka Rao, Krista Reymann, Michael

Table Bussing0%25%50%75%100%Task Progress (%)Shirt FoldingClean Up CounterMake BedDishes to SinkBatch FoldingBox BuildingAverageOut-of-the-BoxFinetuningπ0.6OursRyoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet,
Jaspiar Singh, Anikait Singh, Radu Soricut, Huong Tran,
Vincent Vanhoucke, Quan Vuong, Ayzaan Wahid, Stefan
Welker, Paul Wohlhart, Jialin Wu, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng
Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-2:
Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge
to robotic control. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818,
2023.

[9] Jingjing Chen, Hongjie Fang, Chenxi Wang, Shiquan
History-aware visuomotor
arXiv preprint
tracking.

Wang, and Cewu Lu.
policy learning via point
arXiv:2509.17141, 2025.

[10] Shouyuan Chen, Sherman Wong, Liangjian Chen, and
Yuandong Tian. Extending context window of large
arXiv
language models via positional interpolation.
preprint arXiv:2306.15595, 2023.

[11] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau,
Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran
Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via
action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics
Research, 2025.

[12] Nhat Chung, Taisei Hanyu, Toan Nguyen, Huy Le,
Frederick Bumgarner, Duy Minh Ho Nguyen, Khoa Vo,
Kashu Yamazaki, Chase Rainwater, Tung Kieu, et al.
Rethinking progression of memory state in robotic ma-
nipulation: An object-centric perspective. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.11478, 2025.

[13] Ria Doshi, Homer Walke, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari,
and Sergey Levine. Scaling cross-embodied learning:
One policy for manipulation, navigation, locomotion and
aviation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2024.
[14] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov,
Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner,
Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold,
Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words:
Transformers for image recognition at scale. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

[15] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch,
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid,
Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e:
An embodied multimodal language model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.

[16] Danny Driess, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Brian Ichter, Lili
Yu, Adrian Li-Bell, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z Ren, Homer
Walke, Quan Vuong, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, et al. Knowledge
insulating vision-language-action models: Train fast, run
fast, generalize better. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23705,
2025.

[17] Haoquan Fang, Markus Grotz, Wilbert Pumacay, Yi Ru
Wang, Dieter Fox, Ranjay Krishna, and Jiafei Duan.
Sam2act: Integrating visual foundation model with a
memory architecture for robotic manipulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.18564, 2025.

[18] Physical Intelligence. π0: A vision-language-action flow
model for general robot control, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2410.24164.

[19] Physical Intelligence. π0.5: a vision-language-action
model with open-world generalization, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16054.

[20] Huiwon Jang, Sihyun Yu, Heeseung Kwon, Hojin Jeon,
Younggyo Seo, and Jinwoo Shin. Contextvla: Vision-
language-action model with amortized multi-frame con-
text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04246, 2025.

[21] Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino
Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovi-
cova, Alexandre Ram´e, Morgane Rivi`ere, Louis Rouillard,
arXiv preprint
et al. Gemma 3 technical report.
arXiv:2503.19786, 4, 2025.

[22] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted
Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov,
Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla:
An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.

[23] Seungjae Lee, Yibin Wang, Haritheja Etukuru, H. Jin
Kim, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, and Lerrel Pinto.
Behavior generation with latent actions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.03181, 2024.

[24] Hao Li, Shuai Yang, Yilun Chen, Xinyi Chen, Xiaoda
Yang, Yang Tian, Hanqing Wang, Tai Wang, Dahua
Lin, Feng Zhao, et al. Cronusvla: Towards efficient
and robust manipulation via multi-frame vision-language-
action modeling. AAAI, 2025.

[25] Kunchang Li, Xinhao Li, Yi Wang, Yinan He, Yali Wang,
Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. Videomamba: State space
In European
model for efficient video understanding.
conference on computer vision, pages 237–255. Springer,
2024.

[26] Fanqi Lin, Ruiqian Nai, Yingdong Hu, Jiacheng You,
Junming Zhao, and Yang Gao. Onetwovla: A unified
vision-language-action model with adaptive reasoning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11917, 2025.

[27] Jiaheng Liu, Dawei Zhu, Zhiqi Bai, Yancheng He,
Huanxuan Liao, Haoran Que, Zekun Wang, Chenchen
Zhang, Ge Zhang, Jiebin Zhang, et al. A comprehensive
survey on long context language modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.17407, 2025.

[28] Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush
Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio
Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın. What
matters in learning from offline human demonstrations
for robot manipulation. CoRL, 2021.

[29] Max Sobol Mark, Jacky Liang, Maria Attarian, Chuyuan
Fu, Debidatta Dwibedi, Dhruv Shah, and Aviral Kumar.
Bpp: Long-context robot imitation learning by focusing
on key history frames. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15010,
2026.

[30] Bolin Ni, Houwen Peng, Minghao Chen, Songyang Zhang,
Gaofeng Meng, Jianlong Fu, Shiming Xiang, and Haibin
Ling. Expanding language-image pretrained models for
general video recognition. In European conference on
computer vision, pages 1–18. Springer, 2022.

[31] NVIDIA. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for

generalist humanoid robots, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2503.14734.

[32] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl
Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey
Hejna, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, Tobias Kreiman, You
Liang Tan, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Pannag Sanketi,
Quan Vuong, Ted Xiao, Dorsa Sadigh, Chelsea Finn, and
Sergey Levine. Octo: An open-source generalist robot
policy. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems,
Delft, Netherlands, 2024.

[33] Open X-Embodiment Collaboration, Abhishek Padalkar,
Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex Bewley, Alex Her-
zog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khazatsky, Anant Rai,
Anikait Singh, Anthony Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Ayzaan
Wahid, Ben Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim, Bern-
hard Sch¨olkopf, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu,
Chelsea Finn, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chenguang
Huang, Christine Chan, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan Fu, Coline
Devin, Danny Driess, Deepak Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter
B¨uchler, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Dorsa Sadigh, Edward
Johns, Federico Ceola, Fei Xia, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou,
Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Gautam Salhotra, Ge Yan, Giulio
Schiavi, Hao Su, Hao-Shu Fang, Haochen Shi, Heni Ben
Amor, Henrik I Christensen, Hiroki Furuta, Homer Walke,
Hongjie Fang, Igor Mordatch, Ilija Radosavovic, Isabel
Leal, Jacky Liang, Jaehyung Kim, Jan Schneider, Jasmine
Hsu, Jeannette Bohg, Jeffrey Bingham, Jiajun Wu, Jialin
Wu, Jianlan Luo, Jiayuan Gu, Jie Tan, Jihoon Oh, Jitendra
Malik, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Joseph J. Lim,
Jo˜ao Silv´erio, Junhyek Han, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch,
Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan,
Ken Goldberg, Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento
Kawaharazuka, Kevin Zhang, Keyvan Majd, Krishan
Rana, Krishnan Srinivasan, Lawrence Yunliang Chen,
Lerrel Pinto, Liam Tan, Lionel Ott, Lisa Lee, Masayoshi
Tomizuka, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Mingtong
Zhang, Mingyu Ding, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Mohit
Sharma, Moo Jin Kim, Naoaki Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen,
Nicolas Heess, Nikhil J Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Nor-
man Di Palo, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Oier
Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Pannag R Sanketi, Paul Wohlhart,
Peng Xu, Pierre Sermanet, Priya Sundaresan, Quan Vuong,
Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Roberto Mart´ın-
Mart´ın, Russell Mendonca, Rutav Shah, Ryan Hoque,
Ryan Julian, Samuel Bustamante, Sean Kirmani, Sergey
Levine, Sherry Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shuran
Song, Sichun Xu, Siddhant Haldar, Simeon Adebola,
Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany, Stefan Schaal, Stefan
Welker, Stephen Tian, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel Belkhale,
Takayuki Osa, Tatsuya Harada, Tatsuya Matsushima, Ted
Xiao, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev, Tony Z.
Zhao, Travis Armstrong, Trevor Darrell, Vidhi Jain,
Vincent Vanhoucke, Wei Zhan, Wenxuan Zhou, Wolfram
Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Xinghao Zhu, Xuanlin
Li, Yao Lu, Yevgen Chebotar, Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu,
Ying Xu, Yixuan Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yoonyoung Cho,

Youngwoon Lee, Yuchen Cui, Yueh hua Wu, Yujin
Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunzhu Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yutaka
Matsuo, Zhuo Xu, and Zichen Jeff Cui. Open X-
Embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and RT-X models.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864, 2023.

[34] Karl Pertsch, Kyle Stachowicz, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess,
Suraj Nair, Quan Vuong, Oier Mees, Chelsea Finn, and
Sergey Levine. Fast: Efficient action tokenization for
vision-language-action models. Robotics: Science and
Systems, 2025.

[35] Physical Intelligence. π0.6 model card. 2025. URL https:
//website.pi-asset.com/pi06star/PI06 model card.pdf.
[36] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James
Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Es-
mail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al.
π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world
generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054, 2025.
[37] Rouhollah Rahmatizadeh, Pooya Abolghasemi, Ladislau
B¨ol¨oni, and Sergey Levine. Vision-based multi-task
manipulation for inexpensive robots using end-to-end
learning from demonstration. In 2018 IEEE international
conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pages
3758–3765. IEEE, 2018.

[38] Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Zichen Cui, Ariuntuya Arty
Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior transformers:
Cloning k modes with one stone. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 35:22955–22968, 2022.
[39] Hao Shi, Bin Xie, Yingfei Liu, Lin Sun, Fengrong
Liu, Tiancai Wang, Erjin Zhou, Haoqiang Fan, Xiangyu
Zhang, and Gao Huang. Memoryvla: Perceptual-cognitive
memory in vision-language-action models for robotic
manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19236, 2025.

[40] Ajay Sridhar, Jennifer Pan, Satvik Sharma, and Chelsea
Finn. Memer: Scaling up memory for robot control via
experience retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20328,
2025.

[41] Andrew Szot, Bogdan Mazoure, Omar Attia, Aleksei
Timofeev, Harsh Agrawal, Devon Hjelm, Zhe Gan, Zsolt
Kira, and Alexander Toshev. From multimodal llms to
generalist embodied agents: Methods and lessons. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.08442, 2024.

[42] Yunlong Tang, Jing Bi, Siting Xu, Luchuan Song, Susan
Liang, Teng Wang, Daoan Zhang, Jie An, Jingyang Lin,
Rongyi Zhu, et al. Video understanding with large
IEEE Transactions on
language models: A survey.
Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 2025.
[43] Gemini Robotics Team. Gemini robotics 1.5: Pushing
the frontier of generalist robots with advanced embodied
reasoning, thinking, and motion transfer, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03342.

[44] Gemini Robotics Team, Saminda Abeyruwan, Joshua
Ainslie, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Montserrat Gonzalez
Arenas, Travis Armstrong, Ashwin Balakrishna, Robert
Baruch, Maria Bauza, Michiel Blokzijl, et al. Gemini
robotics: Bringing ai into the physical world. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.20020, 2025.

[45] GigaBrain Team, Boyuan Wang, Chaojun Ni, Guan
Huang, Guosheng Zhao, Hao Li, Jie Li, Jindi Lv, Jingyu
Liu, Lv Feng, et al. Gigabrain-0.5 m*: a vla that learns
from world model-based reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.12099, 2026.

[46] TRI LBM Team. A careful examination of large behavior
arXiv

models for multitask dexterous manipulation.
preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05331.

[47] Marcel Torne, Andy Tang, Yuejiang Liu, and Chelsea Finn.
Learning long-context diffusion policies via past-token
prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09561, 2025.
[48] Yi-Lin Wei, Haoran Liao, Yuhao Lin, Pengyue Wang,
Zhizhao Liang, Guiliang Liu, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Cycle-
manip: Enabling cyclic task manipulation via effective
historical perception and understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.01022, 2025.

[49] Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Minjie Zhu, Kun Wu,
Zhiyuan Xu, Ning Liu, Ran Cheng, Chaomin Shen, Yaxin
Peng, Feifei Feng, and Jian Tang. Tinyvla: Towards fast,
data-efficient vision-language-action models for robotic
manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12514, 2024.

[50] Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Zhibin Tang,
Chaomin Shen, and Feifei Feng. Dexvla: Vision-language
model with plug-in diffusion expert for general robot
control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05855, 2025.

[51] Wei Wu, Fan Lu, Yunnan Wang, Shuai Yang, Shi Liu,
Fangjing Wang, Qian Zhu, He Sun, Yong Wang, Shuailei
Ma, et al. A pragmatic vla foundation model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2601.18692, 2026.

[52] Seonghyeon Ye, Yunhao Ge, Kaiyuan Zheng, Shenyuan
Gao, Sihyun Yu, George Kurian, Suneel
Indupuru,
You Liang Tan, Chuning Zhu, Jiannan Xiang, Ayaan
Malik, Kyungmin Lee, William Liang, Nadun Ranawaka,
Jiasheng Gu, Yinzhen Xu, Guanzhi Wang, Fengyuan Hu,
Avnish Narayan, Johan Bjorck, Jing Wang, Gwanghyun
Kim, Dantong Niu, Ruijie Zheng, Yuqi Xie, Jimmy Wu,
Qi Wang, Ryan Julian, Danfei Xu, Yilun Du, Yevgen
Chebotar, Scott Reed, Jan Kautz, Yuke Zhu, Linxi ”Jim”
Fan, and Joel Jang. World action models are zero-shot
policies, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15922.

[53] Zongzheng Zhang, Haobo Xu, Zhuo Yang, Chenghao
Yue, Zehao Lin, Huan-ang Gao, Ziwei Wang, and Hao
Zhao. Ta-vla: Elucidating the design space of torque-
aware vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.07962, 2025.

[54] Haoyu Zhen, Xiaowen Qiu, Peihao Chen, Jincheng Yang,
Xin Yan, Yilun Du, Yining Hong, and Chuang Gan. 3d-
vla: 3d vision-language-action generative world model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09631, 2024.

[55] Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Shuaiyi Huang, Jianfeng
Gao, Hal Daum´e III, Andrey Kolobov, Furong Huang, and
Jianwei Yang. Tracevla: Visual trace prompting enhances
spatial-temporal awareness for generalist robotic policies.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10345, 2024.

A. Contributions

APPENDIX

The project was started by HW and DD. DD, HW, and JTS designed the video encoder and short-horizon memory system.
KP designed the long-horizon memory system. MT, KP, HW, KV, SN, and ME designed the evaluation suite and performed
experimental evaluations, including model post-training. DD, KP, AR, and QV developed the pre-training recipe and data
mixture, and ran large-scale model training. HW, KD, KS, and MT developed the infrastructure for long-context VLA training.
JT optimized inference of the MEM VLA. SL and CF provided advice throughout the project. MT, KP, DD, BI, KV, SN, SL,
and CF worked on writing, illustrations, and the video.

B. Task Details

1) Long-horizon Tasks (Section IV-A):

a) Preparing the items for a recipe: The goal of the task is for the robot to take out all of the items for a recipe. The
items are placed in various, randomized locations throughout the kitchen (fridge, cabinet, drawers, stove ...). The policy’s
prompt specifies which items should be assembled, where they should be placed (countertop, stove, sink), and their respective
initial location in the kitchen. We list a few prompt examples below. The robot will receive 1 point per item retrieved and
placed in the requested position. Most recipes consist of 6 to 7 points. We collected data on over 40 recipes with a large variety
of objects, scenes, appliances, prompts. The evaluation is done on a variety of unseen scenes, with seen recipes.

Mashed potatoes

Take out supplies for the recipe. Remove the lid from the pot on the stove and place the lid on the countertop to the left
of the sink, and pick up the pot and place it in the sink. Get the potatoes, butter, milk from the fridge and place them on
the countertop to the left of the sink. Get the masher from the top drawer to the left of the sink and place it on the
countertop to the left of the stove.

Fried rice

Take out the supplies for the recipe. Get the bag of rice and the spam from the cabinet on the bottom right of the
dishwasher and place them on the countertop to the left of the sink. Get the soy sauce from the fridge and place it on the
same section of the countertop to the left of the sink. Get the pan from the bottom cabinet to the right of the dishwasher
and put it on the stovetop. Get the spatula from the top drawer to the right of the dishwasher and place it on the pan on
the stovetop.

Pizza

Take out the supplies for the recipe. Get the baking tray from the bottom cabinet on the left of the dishwasher and place
it on the countertop to the left of the sink. Get the pizza dough, package of pepperoni, and bag of cheese from the fridge
and place them on the countertop to the left of the sink. Get the dough roller from the top drawer to the right of the
stove and place it on the countertop to the left of the sink.

b) Cleaning the kitchen: This task requires cleaning a kitchen by wiping the countertop with the sponge, drying the
countertop with a paper towel, storing any food items left in the countertop inside the fridge, putting all the dishes from the
dishrack into the cabinets, and washing all of the dishes from the sink. The scoring consists of +1 point per subtask done and
on average episodes consist of 8 subtasks. Below we provide an example prompt.

Clean kitchen

Clean up the kitchen. Wipe the countertop with the sponge and dry it with the paper towel and throw the towels in the
trash can under the sink. Put the mustard in the fridge. Put the dishes in the bottom cabinet on the left of the fridge.
Wash the blue plate and black plate and place them in the dishrack.

2) In-context adaptation (Section IV-B):

a) Chopstick Pick Up: The policy is tasked with picking up a chopstick on a variable height table. During data collection,
the chopstick is placed at random locations on the table with random table heights in the upper half of the table height range.
We collect human interventions whenever the policy mis-grasps, and then train both memory and non-memory policies on this
data and evaluate them with the chopstick randomly placed on the table at the lowest table height setting. The final policies are
scored +1 for picking up the chopstick and +1 for placing it in the bin, and success is a score of 2.

b) Open Refrigerator: The goal of the task is to open a fridge in front of the robot. The fridge does not have obvious
visual cues indicating which side the door hinge is on, leading policies to often attempt to open it in the wrong direction. We
collect human interventions whenever the robot opens the fridge in the wrong direction. For evaluation, an episode is defined
as successful if it takes ≤ 4 grasps to open the door, to test for intentional strategy switching rather than repeated random
sampling.

3) Analysis Experiments (Section IV-C):

a) Three-way swap mugs: The goal is to place three coffee mugs under a coffee machine sequentially. Two mugs start at
random positions on the table and a third mug starts under the coffee machine. The scoring consists of obtaining +1 point for
each mug that goes on the coffee machine without tipping and without repeating mugs. Only one mug can go on the coffee
machine at a time, so the robot needs to place it back on a random location on the table after it was placed under the coffee
machine to make space for the next mug.

b) Find object: The goal is to retrieve the hidden object in a cabinet with four drawers. In the beginning of the episode,
a person places the object in a random drawer. The robot needs to remember which drawer the person placed the object
into, then open the correct drawer and retrieve the item and place it on the table. One point will be received for successfully
accomplishing the task without opening any incorrect drawer.

c) Unpack groceries: The goal is to retrieve all items from a grocery bag without missing any items inside. The inside of
the bag is not observable from the third person camera of the robot, and the number of items in the bag is randomized across
episodes. Thus, to complete the task, the robot will need to remember how many objects are left in the bag from its past wrist
camera observations. Episodes are marked as a success if the policy retrieved all items from the bag and indicated completion
by moving home once all items are retrieved.

d) Scoop coffee: The goal is to put exactly two scoops of coffee beans in a grinder. The robot needs to remove the lid
from the hopper of the grinder, pick up a coffee scoop, put two scoops of coffee from an opened coffee bean package into the
grinder, then put the lid back on. Episodes are marked as a success if exactly two scoops are added to the grinder and the lid is
put back on.

e) Grilled cheese: The goal of the task is to prepare a grilled cheese sandwich. The robot has to assemble the grilled
cheese sandwich in the pan, then wait for the grilled cheese to cook, flip it, wait for the other side to cook, and finally plate the
grilled cheese. The policy receives +1 point for assembling the sandwich, cooking for the correct amount of time (between 30
seconds and 3 minutes per side), flipping, and plating.

f) Window cleaning: The goal is to wipe the window door of a phone booth. The task consists of spraying windex on the
window, ripping off a paper towel from a roll, then wiping the whole window, and finally throwing the paper towel in the trash.
The robot needs to remember which steps have been completed and which part of the window have already been wiped during
the cleaning phase. Episodes are marked as a success if all steps of the task are completed. It is considered a failure if the
policy fails to wipe parts of the window.

g) Table bussing: The goal is to sort 12 objects from a tabletop into (A) a bussing bin (for utensils and tableware), and
(B) a trash can (for plastic containers, bottles, and wrapping paper). The policy receives a score of +1 for every correctly placed
item.

h) Shirt folding: The robot has to fold a shirt on a tabletop. At the beginning of the episode the shirt is flattened on
the table. The episode is scored as a success if the shirt is successfully folded into a rectangle without seams sticking out or
excessive wrinkles.

i) Clean up counter: The goal is to clean items from a counter into a drawer. The robot has to open the drawer, place all
items on the counter into the drawer, and close it. An episode is counted as a success if all subtasks are completed successfully.
j) Make bed: The goal is to tidy a bed, by straightening the blanket, and placing any pillows at the head of the bed. The

episode is scored as a success if all pillows are placed at the head of the bed, and the blanket is tidied.

k) Kitchen cleanup: The goal is to clean the counter of a kitchen, by placing multiple plates, bowls, and a cutting board

from the counter into a nearby sink. The episode is scored as a success if all plates are placed into the sink.

l) Batch folding: In contrast to the shirt folding task, here the clothes start in a hamper on one side of the table. The
robot needs to take the clothing item out of the hamper, flatten it, fold it, and then stack it onto a stack of existing clothes on
the table. The hamper may contain various t-shirts and shorts. Episodes are scored as successes if the clothing items are folded
into rectangles without seams sticking out or excessive wrinkling.

m) Box building: Given a flattened cardboard cutout, the robot is tasked to fold the cardboard into a box. This task
requires multiple precise, well-coordinated bimanual manipulations to assemble the box. Episodes are scored as successful if
the box is fully assembled without damaging the box.

C. Video encoder with Space-Time separable attention

We describe how we can adjust a layer in a given ViT image encoder to instantiate our video-encoding scheme.
Let zl−1

p,t denote the input embeddings to layer l for spatial patch p and timestep t (where t ∈ [−K, 0]). We first modify the

embedding by adding a sinusoidal position embedding based on t, denote the output of this step with

where e(t) denotes the sinusoidal position embedding and we set the boundary condition e(0) = 0.

We then re-use the ViT’s standard query key and value projections which in our case are given as

ˆzl−1
p,t = zl−1

p,t + e(t),

p,t

ql,a
p,t = W l,a
p,t = W l,a
kl,a
p,t = W l,a
vl,a

Q LN(cid:0)ˆzl−1
K LN(cid:0)ˆzl−1
V LN(cid:0)ˆzl−1

p,t

p,t

(cid:1),
(cid:1),
(cid:1),

(1)

where a indexes the attention head and LN denotes a layer-norm implementation (we use RMSNorm but this choice is dependent
on the ViT we start from).

Next, we can define the general attention mechanism (ignoring normalization for brevity of notation) as the softmax over the

query and key outer product:

(cid:16)
p,t(S = {1, . . . N }, T = {1, . . . , T })[ˆz] = SM

αl,a

(ql,a

p,t)T · (cid:2)kl,a

0,0{kl,a

p′,t′}p′∈S,t′∈T

(cid:3)(cid:17)

,

(2)

where SM denotes the softmax operation and S = {1, . . . N } and T = {1, . . . , T } denote the space and time indices we want to
perform attention over respectively. With this general definition we can define the space only attention mechanism as instantiating
αl,a
p,t(S = {1, . . . N }, T = {}) and the time only attention mechanism as instantiating αl,a
p,t(S = {}, T = {1, . . . , T }). Thus the
attention mechanism used in our video encoder is precisely given as

p,t(S = {1, . . . N }, T = {})[αl,a
αl,a

p,t(S = {1, . . . N }, T = {1, . . . , T })[ˆz]].

(3)

And thereafter we follow the standard computation of a transformer layer, i.e. we compute the outputs of the transformer by
first combining attention weights α with values v and passing the corresponding outputs to a MLP.

